Rebecca Goodwin
rj2339


It seems that someone, somewhere is recording everything we do on a daily basis. Data such as what we buy, our phone's location, what terms we search through Google, are all collected (often, but not always, anonymously.) #...# While big data has exciting potential in scientific applications, this paper will mainly focus on social implications. For better or worse, big data is changing the way we perceive the world around us. Big data not only tells us about the world as it currently is, but has the potential to shape human interactions in the future. This is a powerful ability and we must be careful to use it wisely.

Background
The big data is, in general, about using huge sets of data to draw conclusions. The term is a very broad one, encompassing everything from drawing scientific conclusions from datasets, to analyzing vast amounts of search terms to try to target ads for a particular user. Some of the data analysis techniques discussed in this paper are examples of data mining. Big data and data mining are not exactly interchangeable, though they have similar meanings. Data mining refers to specific pattern-finding# algorithms used on large datasets, while big data more generally refers to the general analysis of large datasets. Three general categories of data mining are anomaly detection, association learning, and cluster detection. (Furnas) # Speaking more generally about big data, the buzzword does not just refer to making use of ever-increasinly large data sets. As Martin Hilbert says in his article "Big Data for Development: From Information- to Knowledge Societies", "the key feature of the paradigmatic change is that analytic treatment of data is systematically placed at the forefront of intelligent decision-making." (Hilbert) We are not simply collecting data and coming to simple conclusions, but approaching the world from the viewpoint that with enough data, and enough analysis, we can gain an accurate picture of the way things are. With this information, informed decisions can be made and actions taken.

Businesses
A key driver of big data is, as would be expected, money. A huge application of big data is in business. Companies use big data to ensure that their product choices and prices match customers' desires. "Retailers, like Walmart and Kohl’s, analyze sales, pricing and economic, demographic and weather data to tailor product selections at particular stores and determine the timing of price markdowns." (Lohr) This kind of data analysis has obvious advantages from a business perspective. Maximizing profits requires finding the delicate balance between supply and demand, and big data is a key to give insight#. "Shipping companies, like U.P.S., mine data on truck delivery times and traffic patterns to fine-tune routing." (Lohr) The implications of these types of applications is wonderful multiple perspectives. Less wasted product means better revenue for retailers, less wasted fuel means less pollution. And customers' needs are met better than ever. Big data isn't just about optimizing profits for business. The goal of big data analytics is to get an accurate picture of how things are. In some cases, these insights help customers, as well. Valocchi, from IBM, pointed out in an interview that "there could be billing disputes that come from customers. Using technology, you can show the lineage of data, to point to errors or proof [about whether the customer's bill correctly reflects] exact consumption." (Danigelis) This type of data could either help or hurt customers depending on particular situations, but it is hard to argue against fairness for all parties, which big data can help achieve. Hunn# gives an example of how big data can help customers detect inefficient appliances:
 "We've developed a range of clip-on sensors [...] that customers can self-install. We're starting to put in new sets of algorithms to look at how efficient your appliances are. [...] We can give maintenance information back to consumers." (danigelis) This example again shows us that data can be used to benefit the customer, since inefficiencies can be detected and repaired to save money. 

#might delete for now
Criticism of approach to Big Data
While it is clear that big data can give us powerful insight, there have been criticisms to the general big data paradigm. In the age of empiricism, it is tempting to think that given enough data, any problem can be solved. 
Big data shows us only the way things are right now, at best  (hilbert) http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=2205145
lack of hypothesis http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=2205145 (hilbert)
A large part of the big data paradigm is that huge data sets give an accurate, bias-free view of the world. "Big Data also supplies more raw material for statistical shenanigans and biased fact- finding excursions. It offers a high-tech twist on an old trick: I know the facts, now let’s find ’em. That is, says Rebecca Goldin, a mathematician at George Mason University, “one of the most pernicious uses of data.” (source??)
As Jesper Andersen said, "[...] the truth is that the moment you touch the data, you've spoiled it. For any operation, you have destroyed that objective basis for it." (bollier)

Spectacular errors can emerge when researchers try to build social science findings into technological systems. A classic example arose when Friendster chose to implement Robin Dunbar’s (1998) work. Analyzing gossip practices in humans and grooming habits in monkeys, Dunbar found that people could only actively maintain 150 relationships at any time and argued that this number represented the maximum size of a person's personal network. Unfortunately, Friendster believed that people were replicating their pre-existing personal networks on the site, so they inferred that no one should have a friend list greater than 150. Thus, they capped the number of ‘Friends’ people could have on the system (boyd, 2006).

Privacy
One of the biggest concerns about big data is privacy. A somewhat creepy# side of this is that companies may not necessarily want customers to know exactly how much they know. Charles Duhigg of the New York Times did a story on how the retailer Target carefully chooses its ads for customers. Combinations of items can suggest, for instance, that a customer is pregnant. And these combinations are not necessarily obvious--## Pole, Target's statistition, found that things like unsented lotion and cotton balls could signal a woman was approaching her due date. Target found that customers were put off when they received ads only for maternal items, so it began to mix these ads in with other ads so they targeting (pun intended) would be less apparent. (Duhigg) 
Total Information Awareness http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Total_Information_Awareness
ADVISE (Analysis, Dissemination, Visualization, Insight, and Semantic Enhancement) http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/ADVISE
Data aggregation http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Aggregate_function

##Especially since in many cases, people are not aware that data is even being collected and stored.



A common concern is that when data is collected about our every move and analyzed by the government##, we have taken our first step towards a Big Brother society. The biggest concern is, of course, that of mistakenly identifying a law-abiding citizen as a potential threat. An open letter to the government## by the Association for Computing Machinery club# asks the question, " Is any level of false positive acceptable - and Constitutional - in such a system?" If we are simply analyzing data # to, say, classify spam, this question is not nearly so important. We will want to minimize false positives, of course, but the mistake is not nearly so grave as if a human is falsly accused of a crime # of which she is innocent. When we are talking about actual humans, a mistake becomes a much bigger deal##. A founding premise of our country is that anyone is innocent until proven guilty. While probabilistic data is evidence, people# may be too quick to put too much stock in it. For instance, ##humus bollier# While hummus correlation is not an overt accusation, it still challenges a basic principle that citizens should be allowed unbiased slate. If we find other evidence that someone Middle Eastern may have committed a crime, should we allow the fact## that there is a correllation between race and crime to weigh against the accused before even examining any real evidence?# Suppose that a murder is committed and some cell phone data reveals I was within walking distance of the crime a few minutes before it happened. This piece of data is evidence that no doubt should weight into the decision of my guilt. It is not enough by itself to convict me, but combined with other evidence could lead to a strong case for my guilt. But suppose instead the piece of data is that I belong to a race that has been statistically proven more likely to commit this type of crime. Should this sort of evidence weigh into the judge's decision? Many reasonable people would say no, it is important for the judge to be unbiased. But in the rapidly growing# paradigm of big data, this could be viewed as evidence just like any other piece of data. If I am indeed innocent, other evidence should weigh in my favor. But the question is whether my race should have weighed into the decision# at at all. #...# An alternative opinion is that probabilistic data is a legitimate basis for probable cause. Kim Taiple of the # has the opinion that "'If you start from the premise that data is going to exist and the data may be relevant for making a judgment that is important to society', then the goal should not be to ban the use of correlations and data analysis." (Lohr) S#he compares data to guns--we should control their abuse, but not take them (or data analysis) away. 


Even more concerning than data is collected non-anonymously# is data collecting that is supposedly anonymous--but which can be connected to individuals by clever techniques. The term de-anonymization# refers to taking an anonymized dataset and intersecting it with another, non-anonymous data set connect records with individuals.# This is especially concerning in cases in which individuals may not even be aware data is being collected. For instance, it probably does not occur to the average hospital patient that their anonymized records could be made available to researchers. And it is even less obvious that someone could potentially connect names to records with the right tools.
http://www.theguardian.com/uk/2009/feb/25/database-state-ippr-paper
http://www.washingtonpost.com/investigations/us-intelligence-mining-data-from-nine-us-internet-companies-in-broad-secret-program/2013/06/06/3a0c0da8-cebf-11e2-8845-d970ccb04497_story.html




Prediction and prevention of (bad) events
crime http://www.zdnet.com/aspen-ideas-festival-how-data-could-help-solve-international-crime-7000017478/
of global conflicts 
Global Pulse "Global Pulse, a new initiative by the United Nations, wants to leverage Big Data for global development. The group will conduct so-called sentiment analysis of messages in social networks and text messages — using natural-language deciphering software — to help predict job losses, spending reductions or disease outbreaks in a given region. The goal is to use digital early-warning signals to guide assistance programs in advance to, for example, prevent a region from slipping back into poverty" (Lohr)

"In economic forecasting, research has shown that trends in increasing or decreasing volumes of housing-related search queries in Google are a more accurate predictor of house sales in the next quarter than the forecasts of real estate economists. The Federal Reserve, among others, has taken notice. In July, the National Bureau of Economic Research is holding a workshop on “Opportunities in Big Data” and its implications for the economics profession." (Lohr)
http://www.kernelmag.com/features/report/4761/the-predictive-maths-of-war/#
social Networks
http://news.cnet.com/8301-1023_3-57471570-93/facebook-scans-chats-and-posts-for-criminal-activity/
http://www.examiner.com/article/the-often-disturbing-reality-of-social-media


recommender systems
Music http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Music_Information_Retrieval  
Books

Influence people
In the Foundation Trilogy, Isaac Asimov explores the idea that the future can be predicted by a combination of history, psychology, and statistics. In the prequel, "Prelude to the Foundation," he brings up an interesting point--that the "predicting" the future itself has an effect on what will happen. The plot focuses on a world leader# who is trying to get a "prediction" of his continued beneficial reign. Have we seen this kind of "predicting" in our own world?###
As Kim Taipale, the Founder and Executive Director of the Center for Advanced Studies in Science and Technology said at the ###, "[It is] the classic Heisenberg principle problem. Once data is made available and visualized, people can actually act in ways to change the data as a result of having seen it. S#he was specifically referring to "Google Bombing," the practice of graming the Google search engine to "raise the ranking of a given page in the search results." (bollier) But there are much deeper implications than just trying to game the system. #...#


Studies# have shown that women consistently score lower on math tests than men. However, it is interesting that other studies have shown that when young girls are told females do worse on particular tasks, they in fact do worse. However, if they are ignorant of this "disadvantage," they perform the same. (Cimpian) A study by Robert Rosenthal has shown that when teachers are told they have some students who have scored highly on a test that predicts growth in IQ, those students in fact do better--despite the fact the fact that the "high-scoring" children were actually chosen at random (Rosenthal). #, they tell us something: prior beliefs absolutely have an effect on the future.#sounds stupid# Suppose data shows black people are more likely to commit crime. Let us suppose this data is without question. The issue is that this very knowledge can impact future events. Black people may be treated with suspicion, and may on a subconscious level think, "If I'm already being treated like a criminal, why not act like one?" This of course will generate more data confirming the race/crime# correlation which will reinforce people's beliefs in a positive#? feedback loop. The tragedy is that had this data not been known, perhaps the outcome could have been different. #very badly worded.#The American fundamental that everyone should be treated equally has been violated based on "scientific" principles #wat#. that In an age innundated with even more data that has the potential to shape our beliefs, it is imperative that we recognize the human ability to shape the future based on beliefs about #the future.

There is also the idea that pleasing the customer can be too much of a good thing. It has been suggested that Google's tailoring of search results to individual users is not unambiguously# a good thing. This practice# gives the user back more of the same and doesn’t prompt anyone to challenge current beliefs.(http://www.theatlantic.com/technology/archive/2012/04/how-data-mining-works/255388/ ??#)

Like it or not, we are in the information age.  While this paper brings up several concerns about big data's implications, I am not at all arguing that big data processing should cease. Given the sheer amount of data generated all the time#, it would fruitless to argue that we should stop collecting or fail to utilize it. However, it is important to realize that data does not always paint an accurate picture, and that looking at data can affect future data##






