
bollier
The Aspen Institute communications and Society program convened 25 leaders, entrepreneurs, and academics from the realms of technology, business management, economics, statistics, journalism, computer science, and public policy to address theses subjects at the 2009 roundtable on information technology.
report of that 3-day conference
Looks meaty and good
from footnotes:
N. Eagle and A. Pentland, "Reality Mining: Sensing Complex Social Systems," Peronsal and Ubiquitous Computer, vol. 10, no. 4, pp. 255-268.

lesk
about big brother, though not just about government. Pretty good, brings up some bad things about big data. I think pretty relevant



boyd: Six Provocations for Big Data
gives 6 issues with big data. Great for argument against it, though mostly seems
to be about pitfalls when doing social science research

Tom M. Mitchell
The article from class. Has interesting little examples

danigelis
Interview with some people about various issues, including privacy. Seems to be with a utilities company?

hilbert
paper that talks about lack of hypothesis: (maybe?) Big data shows us only the way things are right now, at best (maybe?) Looks good. Some socity stuff http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=2205145 in my draft


a lot of numbers
furnas
well done summary

lohr The age of big data
fluffy overview. Some neat quotes

Arthur
fluffy overview, somewhat interesting

batty
about big data in geography specifically. Possibly useful, skipped for now. Not controversial

jackson
seems to be about the risks involved for a business in storing big data, and the kinds of things and internal auditor should focus on to make sure they're not violating anything. meh


Valente
mass media and interpersonal influence in a reproductive health communication campaign in boliva
looks really interesting, not sure if relevant. Maybe if talks about influencing society, which it might

simone
overview, not to great

PRISM
Gellman/Poitras
http://www.washingtonpost.com/investigations/us-intelligence-mining-data-from-nine-us-internet-companies-in-broad-secret-program/2013/06/06/3a0c0da8-cebf-11e2-8845-d970ccb04497_story_3.html (no easy way to print)

Simon
Too Big To Ignore (book)

McCane
http://thenewinquiry.com/essays/total-information-awarness/