Rebecca Goodwin
rj2339

[picture original intro]
It seems that someone, somewhere is recording everything we do on a daily basis. Data such as what we buy, our phone's location, and what terms we search through Google, are all collected. ###  For better or worse, big data is changing the way we perceive the world around us. Big data not only tells us about the world as it currently is, but has the potential to shape human interactions in the future. This is a powerful ability and we must be careful to use it wisely.
#[Video of people going about everyday lives]

Big data is, in general, about using huge sets of data to draw conclusions. The term is a very broad one, encompassing everything from drawing scientific conclusions from datasets, to analyzing vast amounts of search terms to try to target ads for a particular user. We are not simply collecting data and coming to simple conclusions, but approaching the world from the viewpoint that with enough data, and enough analysis, we can gain an accurate picture of the way things are. With this information, informed decisions can be made and actions taken.

A huge application of big data is in business. Companies use big data to ensure that their product choices and prices match customers' desires. "Retailers, like Walmart and Kohl’s, analyze sales, pricing, economic, demographic and weather data to tailor product selections at particular stores and determine the timing of price markdowns." "shipping companies, like U.P.S., mine data on truck delivery times and traffic patterns to fine-tune routing." Maximizing profits requires finding the delicate balance between supply and demand, and big data is a key to give insight on finding this sweet spot. The implications of these types of applications is wonderful from multiple perspectives. Less wasted product means better revenue for retailers, less wasted fuel means less pollution. And customers' needs are met better than ever. 
[picture weather data]
[video of traffic/road]
[video of trucks?]
[video of me typing]
[video of my hand using a phone]


However, a more sinister side of this is that companies may not necessarily want customers to know exactly how much they know. The retailer Target carefully chooses its ads for customers. Combinations of items can suggest, for instance, that a customer is pregnant. And these combinations are not necessarily obvious--Andrew Pole, Target's marketing statistician, found that purchases such as unscented lotion and cotton balls could signal a woman was approaching her due date. Target found that customers were put off when they received ads only for maternal items, so it began to mix these ads in with other ads so that targeting (pun intended) would be less apparent. (Duhigg) While there is nothing overtly immoral in this method of sending out ads, it is a bit unsettling that this kind of information is collected and tracked without the customer's knowledge.

[video/picture target inside and outside]
[video/picture cotton balls]

While this kind of customer stalking seems a bit creepy, when it comes to tracking people's actions, there is a more terrifying entity than retailers: the government.

A common concern is that when data is collected about our every move and analyzed by the government, we have taken our first step towards a Big Brother society. One example of a disconcerting program is the Total Information Awareness program (TIA.) TIA was proposed to monitor American citizens' activities, including emails, phone calls, and medical records. While the program was officially discontinued, the core of the program remains.  The biggest concern is, of course, that of mistakenly identifying a law-abiding citizen as a potential threat. An open letter to the government by the Association for Computing Machinery club asks the question, "Is any level of false positive acceptable - and Constitutional - in such a system?" When we are talking about actual humans, a mistake becomes a big deal. A founding premise of our country is that anyone is innocent until proven guilty. While probabilistic data is evidence, the people examining such evidence may be too quick to put too much stock in it. For instance, Stephen Baker of Business Week came across a story about an FBI agent who found a correlation between hummus consumption and a neighborhood's potential to be a refuge for terrorists (Bollier.) While hummus correlation is not an overt accusation, it still challenges a basic principle that citizens should be allowed a clean, unbiased slate. Suppose that a murder is committed and cell phone data reveals I was within walking distance of the crime a few minutes before it happened. This piece of data is evidence that no doubt should weigh into the decision of my guilt. It is not enough by itself to convict me, but combined with other evidence could lead to a strong case for my guilt. But suppose instead the piece of data is that I belong to a race that has been statistically shown more likely to commit this type of crime. Should this sort of evidence weigh into the judge's decision? Many reasonable people would say no, it is important for the judge to be unbiased. But in the growing paradigm of big data, this could be viewed as evidence just like any other piece of data. If I am indeed innocent, other evidence should weigh in my favor. But the question is whether my race should have weighed into the decision at at all. An alternative opinion is that probabilistic data is a legitimate basis for probable cause. Kim Taiple, founder of executive director of the Center for Advanced Studies in Science and Technology, has the opinion that "'If you start from the premise that data is going to exist and the data may be relevant for making a judgment that is important to society', then the goal should not be to ban the use of correlations and data analysis." (Lohr) He compares data to guns--we should control their abuse, but not take them (or data analysis) away. 
[screenshot white house]
[screenshot acm letter]
[photoshop gun/probability]
[screenshot consitution]
In the Foundation Trilogy, Isaac Asimov explores the idea that the future can be predicted by a combination of history, psychology, and statistics. In the prequel, "Prelude to the Foundation," he brings up an interesting point--that the "predicting" the future itself has an effect on what will happen. The plot focuses on a world leader who is trying to get a "prediction" of his continued beneficial reign. Have we seen this kind of "predicting" in our own world?
As Kim Taipale, the Founder and Executive Director of the Center for Advanced Studies in Science and Technology said at the Eighteenth Annual Aspen Institue Roundtable on Information Technology, "[It is] the classic Heisenberg principle problem. Once data is made available and visualized, people can actually act in ways to change the data as a result of having seen it. He was specifically referring to "Google Bombing," the practice of gaming the Google search engine to "raise the ranking of a given page in the search results." (Bollier) But there are much deeper implications than just trying to game the system. Making decisions based on big data can influence society itself.
[picture foundation?]


While there is the potential for unintended consequences as a result of data mining, there is also the potential of very intentionally shaping society on a global scale. 

Global Pulse is a project whose goal is to reduce major issues  on a global scale. The project will conduct sentiment analysis of messages in social networks and text messages — using natural-language processing — to help predict job losses, spending reductions or disease outbreaks in a given region. The project's goal is to use digital early-warning signals to guide assistance programs in advance. Such programs could, for example, prevent a region from slipping back into poverty. Big data could change our very future--previously unpredictable crises could now potentially be averted. 


Kavel Leetaru of the University of Illinois is working on supercomputer, Nautilus, that will predict global conflicts. He feeds Nautilus, the computer, blogs and articles to determine the social climate of a particular area. The super-computer found indications of a negative mood in Egypt right before the Gulf War and the Arab Spring in Egypt. (Bauer) So far, it has only worked to "predict" the past, but we can foresee a future in which data analysis becomes good enough to predict conflicts in time to react to them.



As another example of big data used to predict societal problems, "in economic forecasting, research has shown that trends in increasing or decreasing volumes of housing-related search queries in Google are a more accurate predictor of house sales in the next quarter than the forecasts of real estate economists." (Lohr)
[global pulse screenshots]


// that supercomputer
[youtube arab spring]

// constitute


Like it or not, we are in the information age.Given the sheer amount of data generated constantly, it would fruitless to argue that we should stop collecting data or fail to utilize it. Big data has the potential to change the way society functions, and it is our responsibility to ensure this influence will be a positive one.

credits:
music: Shaker music, Steve Reich part 1 shaking and trembling

[video hands typing on keyboard]
[video hands using phone]
[video stephen/me using computer from back?]
[video hand pulling credit card out from pocket]
[video me reading a book]






